Tartan Facts - Carnegie Mellon University Athletics: Who founded Carnegie Mellon University? Carnegie Technical Schools was founded in 1900 by Andrew Carnegie. Twelve years later it became known as the Carnegie Institute of Technology. In 1967, the school merged with Mellon Institute and became what is known today as Carnegie Mellon University. 
Tartan Facts - Carnegie Mellon University Athletics: What is a Tartan? The Carnegie Mellon athletic teams are nicknamed the "Tartans" as a nod to Andrew Carnegie's Scottish heritage. A tartan is often misrepresented as a fierce warrior from either the Asian tundra or Scottish highlands. In actuality, a Tartan is a twilled woolen fabric with a plaid design. It is of Scottish origin and consists of stripes of various colors and widths against a solid ground, denoting a particular family lineage. The school's founder, Andrew Carnegie, was born in Dunfermline, Scotland, in 1835. Carnegie came to the United States in 1848 and founded Carnegie Technical Schools in Pittsburgh in 1900.The Scottish terrier mascot performer sports Carnegie tartan attire, while the graphic mascot is wearing a plaid scarf around its neck. So what's the difference between tartan and plaid? You'll know it's a tartan if... • "It's a check or pattern in a variety of colours in woven fabric in which bands of colour are repeated in equal proportion in warp (running lengthwise) and weft (running across)." • "Each stripe of the warp crosses every stripe of the weft, so when vertical and horizontal stripes of the same color cross, the result is solid color at the point of intersection." • "The arrangement of colored threads is the same in the warp as in the weft." You can find our official tartan on various items in the University Store .Source: "Tartan: Romancing the Plaid," by Jeffrey Banks and Doria De La Chapelle
Tartan Facts - Carnegie Mellon University Athletics: Official Mascot? More than a century after Carnegie Mellon University opened its doors, an official mascot finally made its mark. Although students have dressed as a Scottish terrier — typically referred to as Scotty — for 50 years, it wasn't until 2007 that Carnegie Mellon officially welcomed the Scottish terrier as the university's first mascot. In keeping with tradition, students, faculty, staff and alumni voted to name the new official mascot Scotty. But it's not just the costumed mascot that voters named. The live dog is also known as Scotty to the Carnegie Mellon community.
Tartan Facts - Carnegie Mellon University Athletics: About Scotty | Celebrating Scotty | Performer Requests 
Tartan Facts - Carnegie Mellon University Athletics: Department Quick Facts Name of School: Carnegie Mellon UniversityCity/Zip: Pittsburgh, PA 15213Founded: 1900Enrollment (undergrad): 6,982- Fall 2021Enrollment (graduate and doctoral): 7,062 - Fall 2021Alumni: 102,577Nickname: TartansMascot: Scottie DogSchool Colors: Cardinal and GrayFootball Stadium and Track and Field: Gesling StadiumCapacity: 3,500Surface: FieldTurfBasketball/Volleyball Gym: Wiegand GymnasiumCapacity: 500Soccer Stadium: CMU Soccer FieldCapacity: 250Surface: FieldTurfAffiliation: NCAA Division IIIConference: University Athletic Association | Presidents' Athletic Conference (Football Only)President: Dr. Farnam JahanianAlma Mater, Year: University of Texas at AustinAthletic Director: Dr. Josh CentorAlma Mater, Year: Brandeis, 2004Athletic Department Phone: 412-268-8054Mailing Address:  5000 Forbes Avenue / Pittsburgh, PA 15213
About Scotty: About Scotty The Scottish terrier has long been a familiar figure around Carnegie Mellon's campus. For years students have suited up in an unofficial Scottish terrier costume to excite the fans at athletic events. But the relationship between the Scottish terrier breed and Carnegie Mellon far precedes anybody doing somersaults in a dog costume. Andrew Carnegie, founder of the university, kept a Scottish terrier as his pet. Scotty's road from popular icon to official mascot of the university began in 2006. Carnegie Mellon formed a Mascot Identity Task Force in November 2006, which consisted of students, faculty, staff and alumni. The Task Force was co-chaired by Director of Athletics Susan Bassett and Dean of Student Affairs Jennifer Church. The mascot selection process included a series of surveys and a university Town Hall meeting. Nearly 78 percent of 2,370 students surveyed in February 2007 voted for the Scottish terrier, and approximately 25 percent of 400 alumni surveyed thought the Scottish terrier was already the mascot. In the spring, the Task Force partnered with SME Branding — a firm with more than 17 years of experience creating mascots for professional sports teams and universities — to develop the graphics for the mascot. During October, students and alumni reviewed potential mascot images in focus groups. Carnegie Mellon's official mascot debuted at the Nov. 10, 2007 home football game. The graphic features a profile of a distinguished, bold Scottish terrier sporting a plaid scarf around his neck. The dog is contained in a shield, representing Carnegie Mellon's Scottish heritage. The Task Force then partnered with a mascot costume company to design our Scottish terrier in the winter of 2007. The official Scotty costume was unveiled at the 2008 Spring Carnival. The Scottish terrier breed is known for its keen, alert and intelligent expression. Its temperament is described as determined and thoughtful while its physical aspects exemplify strength, power and agility in a small package. Many of these traits are also apparent throughout the university, making the Scottish terrier a natural choice for Carnegie Mellon's mascot. Fun Fact
The Kiltie Band: The Kiltie Band began in 1908 with a group of just seven students dedicated to supporting Carnegie Tech football, and today's Kiltie Band continues a tradition of excellence originated over a century ago. The Band took the field for its first official performance on November 25th, 1922, on what would have been Andrew Carnegie's 87th birthday. The Kiltie Marching Band consists of musicians and colorguard and plays at all Carnegie Mellon home football games. There is a new show every week with music ranging from traditional marches and oldies to current pop tunes and jazz standards. After football season, the Kiltie Concert Band plays a holiday concert and two spring concerts, including a performance at Carnegie Mellon’s Spring Carnival. Additionally, a part of the band gets together and acts as a pep band for the basketball teams. The Kiltie Band is a campus organization recognized by Student Senate and administered by the Department of Athletics, Physical Education and Recreation. Membership is open to all members of the campus/community without audition. Participants must do their best to promote the success of the ensemble through attendance, attitude, and dependability. FAQs Q: When are rehearsals? A: Football season: Mondays and Thursdays from 5:30 p.m.-7:30 p.m. and Game Day 9:30-11:00a.m. Concert Season: Mondays and Thursdays from 5:30-6:30 p.m. Location is the CUC Studio Theater. Q: When are performances? A: The Kiltie Band performs at all home football games, a holiday concert, and two spring concerts. Times and dates for all performances are announced at the first practice. Q: Are there auditions? A: No, any member of the campus community with music experience is able to join the Kiltie Band! Q: Do I have to memorize music? A: No, the music is changed for every show. You should invest in a good and trusty lyre. Q: When is the first rehearsal? A: On the first day of class (Monday) at 5:30 p.m. in the CUC Studio Theater. If you have questions, please email the Direcator at jolisar@andrew.cmu.edu . Q: Can I borrow a school instrument? A: There are several Kiltie-owned instruments available for your use. Loans begin at 4:30 p.m. before the first rehearsal. Q: What do they wear under those kilts? A: Join and you’ll find out! For more information, visit the Kiltie Band website . Interested in Joining? Please email the following information to Kiltie Band Director Jeremy Olisar. Name High School Address at Carnegie Mellon (if known) Home address Cell number Home number Whether you plan on being in the band or colorguard If in the band what instrument(s) you play Whether you need to borrow an instrument or equipment To see and hear the band in action, visit our YouTube channel .
