Rethinking Voice-Face Correlation: A Geometry View
Xiang Li1, Yandong Wen2, Muqiao Yang1, Jinglu Wang3, Rita Singh1, Bhiksha Raj1,4
1Carnegie Mellon University,2Max Planck Institute,3Microsoft,
4Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
ABSTRACT
Previous works on voice-face matching and voice-guided face syn-
thesis demonstrate strong correlations between voice and face, but
mainly rely on coarse semantic cues such as gender, age, and emo-
tion. In this paper, we aim to investigate the capability of reconstruct-
ing the 3D facial shape from voice from a geometry perspective with-
out any semantic information. We propose a voice-anthropometric
measurement (AM)-face paradigm, which identifies predictable fa-
cial AMs from the voice and uses them to guide 3D face recon-
struction. By leveraging AMs as a proxy to link the voice and face
geometry, we can eliminate the influence of unpredictable AMs and
make the face geometry tractable. Our approach is evaluated on our
proposed dataset with ground-truth 3D face scans and corresponding
voice recordings, and we find significant correlations between voice
and specific parts of the face geometry, such as the nasal cavity and
cranium. Our work offers a new perspective on voice-face corre-
lation and can serve as a good empirical study for anthropometry
science.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Computing methodologies →Appearance and texture represen-
tations .
KEYWORDS
voice, face, vocal tract
ACM Reference Format:
Xiang Li1, Yandong Wen2, Muqiao Yang1, Jinglu Wang3, Rita Singh1, Bhik-
sha Raj1,4. 2023. Rethinking V oice-Face Correlation: A Geometry View. In
Proceedings of ACM Conference (Conference’23). ACM, New York, NY ,
USA, 10 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
1 INTRODUCTION
The study of face-voice correlation has been extensively investigated
in recent years. Previous works on voice-face matching [ 28,44,53],
voice-guided face synthesis [ 9,16,19,54], and voice-guided face
modification have indicated a strong correlation between voice and
face. The most intuitive and commonly used consensus encoded be-
tween voice and face is mainly based on semantics, such as gender,
age and emotion. Most prior works aim to learn a semantic corre-
spondence between voice and face and conduct crossmodal tasks by
leveraging those consensuses. For example, for voice-guided face
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
Conference’23, July 2023, Ottawa, Canada
© 2023 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YY/MM. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
V ocal Tract
AirUnit Impulse𝐻(𝑧)
Vocal T rack
Speech
Gaussian NoiseLPC Filter
Phonatory Module
Face Geometry
(a) Voice Production (b) Linear Predictive Coding
V oice CodeAM-guided 
Reconstruction 
AMs 
Speech
Speech
(c) Speech -AMs -FaceFigure 1: (a) Human voice production. (b) Linear predictive
coding represents the voice by a unit impulse with a set of linear
filters which can be interpreted as an estimation of the vocal
tract. (c) Our voice-AM-Face pipeline first predicts and verifies
predictable anthropometric measurements (AMs) and then uti-
lizes AMs to guide 3D face reconstruction. A phonatory module
is involved to obtain a better representation for AM prediction.
synthesis, the generated faces have reasonable appearances with
proper gender, age and emotion status corresponding to the voice.
Those semantic correlations are strong and easy to learn thus domi-
nant previous models while a fundamental question we want to cast
is, are there any other voice-face correlations except for those coarse
semantics? Is reconstructing identity-fidelity 3D face from voice pos-
sible? In this paper, we aim to explore the voice-face correlations in
a geometry view after constraining all those easily learned semantic
biases.
There are several previous works investigating recovering face
from voice. Most of them are from a 2D perspective [ 16,19,54],
which utilize Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) [ 14,26] to
generate faces with voice as the condition. However, face recovering
from voice is ill-posed. [ 29] found that the recovery mainly focuses
on some semantics of the speaker. For example, attributes such as
ethnicity has weak or no function while gender and age tend to be
recovered. Since those models mainly rely on semantics, the results
are not identity-fidelity which means generated faces can look very
different from the original ones. In addition, for a 2D face image,
identity-unrelated factors like expressions, hairs, glasses, illumina-
tion, background, etc., are also involved in the recovery process
leading to noisy and unstable outcomes. Different from 2D images,
general 3D facial shape is represented by the 3D coordinates of a
number of points on its surface called vertices [ 4] which inherentlyarXiv:2307.13948v1  [cs.CV]  26 Jul 2023
Conference’23, July 2023, Ottawa, Canada Xiang Li1, Y andong Wen2, Muqiao Y ang1, Jinglu Wang3, Rita Singh1, Bhiksha Raj1,4
excludes the identity-unrelated factors. Moreover, since the topology
of 3D facial shape is predefined and consistent across different faces,
we can easily measure the reconstruction accuracy with distances
between the predicted vertices and their ground truths.
Similar to our target, one recent work [ 47] attempts to recover 3D
faces from voice while, due to the lack of ground-truth 3D face scans,
they first generate 2D face images from voice and then reconstruct
3D faces guided by an off-the-shelf 3D face reconstruction model.
The noise enrolled in the 2D-to-3D face reconstruction makes the
result unconvincing. For example, any expression in the 2D face
from the first stage will force the reconstructed 3D face to have the
same expression. In this way, we consider the face is still determined
by the first-stage 2D face image.
In our method, we aim to disable all previously used semantics,
e.g., gender, age and emotion, and focus on the voice-face correlation
from a pure geometry view. Before introducing our method, let us
go back and understand how voice is generated by human beings.
voice is produced by phonatory structures (Fig. 1 (a)), e.g., vocal
tract and vocal cords. Specifically, when producing vowels, the vocal
cords vibrate with no obstruction in the vocal tract. In contrast, for
most consonants, the phonation purely depends on the vocal tract
resonance with a pulmonic airflow. The vocal tract can be assumed
as a filter that makes the phonemes versatile and personalized. With
the phonation mechanism of human beings, as shown in Fig. 1 (b),
Markel et al introduces linear predictive coding (LPC) [ 25] which
models phonation as a unit impulse signal modified by a stack of
tubes (vocal tract) and encodes personalized voice by vocal tract
coefficients. The LPC yields a good physical model of the vocal tract
with only voice inputs in an unsupervised manner. As the mouth
and nose serve as the most important parts of the vocal tract, we
hypothesize that their geometry should be encoded in the voice. With
the tight bind of muscles and skeletons, other parts of face geometry
may also be represented by voice.
Though voice and face geometry should have some correlations,
we have no idea about which part of the face voice can represent.
Constructing uncorrelated relations will lead to random results and
raise the model instability. To tackle this problem, we introduce
the voice-anthropometric measurement (AM)-face paradigm. Pre-
vious studies have shown that anthropometric measurements like
the dimensions of nasal cavities [ 42] or cranium [ 48,49] directly
influence the speaker’s voices. In our voice-AM-face paradigm,
we first summarize a set of AMs from anthropometry literature
[10,11,32,38,55], then identify predictable AMs and use them to
guide the 3D face reconstruction by conducting AM-guided opti-
mization. By leveraging AMs as a proxy to link the voice and face
geometry, we can eliminate the influence of unpredictable AMs and
make the face geometry tractable. In addition, the analysis of AMs
also brings a new view to understanding voice-face correlation in a
fine-grained fashion.
Inspired by LPC which learns the shape of the vocal tract by pro-
ducing voice, we utilize a phonatory module to facilitate voice repre-
sentation learning for face geometry. Similar to the auto-regressive
impulse-by-filter model used in LPC, recently introduced denoising
diffusion probabilistic models [ 18] share a similar structure, which
samples a random noise with auto-regressive updating to form the
final result. Based on the structure similarity, we choose the diffusion
model as our phonatory module.With the predicted AMs, we reconstruct the facial shapes by an
optimization-based method, which first projects the 3D facial shapes
into a low-dimensional linear space [ 4]. By adjusting the coefficients
in low-dimensional space, we obtain different re-projected 3D facial
shapes. Though this paper mainly focuses on understanding the
relationship between the 3D facial shape and voice from a scientific
angle, this technique has its potential applications. For example,
the identity-fidelity facial shape can be used for criminal profiling
scenarios, such as hoax calls and voice-based phishing.
In this paper, we try to answer two core questions - (1) Is there a
correlation between face geometry and voice? (2) If so, which part
of the face can be represented by the voice? To fulfill our target, we
collect a large-scale dataset containing ground-truth 3D face scans
and corresponding voice recordings from 1026 speaker identities.
A voice-AM-face paradigm equipped with a phonatory module is
proposed for analyzing the voice-face correlation. Our contributions
can be summarized as follows.
•We propose a voice-AM-face paradigm and a corresponding
voice-face dataset for tractable 3D face deduction from voice.
•We investigate voice-face correlation in a fine-grained man-
ner by statistically verifying which part of the face can be
reflected by the voice. The results can serve as a good refer-
ence to support future voice-face research, such as voice-face
verification.
•We leverage voice production as a proxy task to learn face
geometry representation and verify that voice production is
highly related to 3D facial shapes.
2 RELATED WORKS
2.1 Voice-face Matching and Voice-guided Face
Synthesis
The human voice contains rich information that can be used to
recognize personality traits, such as speaker identity [ 6,24,33],
gender [ 22], age [ 15,30,39], and emotion status [ 43,51]. V oices
can also be used for monitoring health conditions [ 1] and other
medical applications [ 17]. Most existing works in this area focus
on predicting personality traits that are intuitively related to voice.
Such personality traits may have essential correlations between the
human voice and their faces [45].
Cross-modal voice-face matching [ 28,44,53] and cross-modal
verification [ 27,37,41] are tasks where voices are used as queries to
retrieve faces or vice versa, which have received increasing attention
in recent years. V oice-guided face synthesis is another related task,
which aims to generate coherent and natural lip movements, and
includes methods that drive template images [ 16,19,54] or template
face meshes [ 9] to talk by speech inputs, or replace lip movements
in a video with movements inferred from another video or speech
[8, 46].
Unlike the existing work in related fields that are more focused on
semantic correlations between voice and face, our work investigates
the voice-face correlation from a geometry view by studying holistic
facial structures. There has been recent work that seeks to under-
stand the correlations between voice and facial geometry by first
recovering 2D faces from voice and then reconstructing 3D faces
from the 2D representations [ 47]. However, during this process, it is
still inevitable that the semantic correlations are encoded in the 2D
Rethinking Voice-Face Correlation: A Geometry View Conference’23, July 2023, Ottawa, Canada
face and affect the 2D-to-3D face reconstruction. Instead, we aim to
model our voice-face correlation from a pure geometry view without
the influence of any semantics.
2.2 Phonation and Anthropometry
The human voice is generated by phonatory structures, and the
phonation of different phonemes may be dependent on different
physiological structures. For example, the phonation of consonants
includes some airflow obstruction in the vocal tract, while vowels do
not. By utilizing such properties, it has been proven to be informative
and helpful in various tasks, including automatic speech recogni-
tion [ 12], speech enhancement [ 50] and emotion recognition [ 13].
Beyond those language-related usages, human attributes are also
predictable from voice. There is a substantial body of research on
inferring human attributes from a person’s voice, including speaker
identity [ 7,34], age [ 3,31], gender [ 23], and emotion status [ 43,52].
The interaction between these physiological structures may play
an important role in the recovery of 3D faces from voice. More
specifically, the underlying skeletal and articulatory structure of the
face and the tissue covering them may govern the shapes, sizes, and
acoustic properties of the vocal tract that produces the voice. Linear
predictive coding (LPC) [ 25] which models phonation as a unit im-
pulse signal modified by a stack of tubes (vocal tract) and encodes
personalized voice by vocal tract coefficients. The LPC yields a
good physical model of the vocal tract with only voice inputs in an
unsupervised manner.
To explicitly describe the correspondence between vocal and
facial features, anthropometric measurements have been used in
a wide range of applications to associate with voice production
[10,11,32,38,40,55]. In a broad sense, AMs may cover various
body parameters and characteristics, including skeletal proportions,
race, height, body size, etc. These characteristics may influence the
phonation of voice by the differences in the placement of the glottis,
length of vocal cords, etc.
In this work, we summarize a large set of AMs that is highly
associated with voice-face correlation. Meanwhile, we also identify
the predictable AMs to guide the 3D facial shape reconstruction. The
results can serve as a good reference to support future voice-face
research.
3 METHOD
In this section, we first introduce the task formulation and then
demonstrate our method in detail.
3.1 Formulation
We aim to reconstruct any speaker’s 3D facial shape from their
voice recordings. Given a set of paired voice recordings and 3D
facial shapes{(𝑣𝑖,𝑓𝑖)}from different individuals, where 𝑣𝑖is a voice
recording spoken by the 𝑖-th person and 𝑓𝑖is a 3D facial shape
scanned from the speaker of 𝑣𝑖. The goal is to reconstruct the 3D
facial shape 𝑓of any speaker from their voice recording 𝑣. In our
method, we introduce anthropometric measurements (AMs) 𝑚=
{𝑚(1),···,𝑚(𝑘)}computed from 𝑓as a proxy, where 𝐾is a positive
integer and 𝑚𝑘(𝑘∈ [1,𝐾]) denotes the 𝑘-th AM. Accordingly,
the overall dataset is denoted as D={(𝑣𝑖,𝑓𝑖,𝑚𝑖)}. To statistically
analyze the results, we construct an additional validation set forempirically validating the dependency. Specifically, the dataset Dis
split into a training set D𝑡for model learning, a validation set D𝑣1
for model selection, a validation set D𝑣2for AM selection, and an
evaluation setD𝑒for evaluating the reconstructed 3D facial shapes.
All splits have no overlap.
3.2 Pipeline Overview
As shown in Fig. 2, the proposed method has three main components
- facial AM prediction, AM-guided reconstruction and an auxiliary
phonatory module. On one hand, we predict the AMs that are poten-
tially correlated with voice production from anthropometry literature
[10,11,32,38,55]. An estimatorEis trained with uncertainty learn-
ing with a voice code 𝑒. On the other hand, inspired by the voice
production mechanism, we introduce a phonatory module as a con-
straint to facilitate the training of AM prediction. In particular, a
diffusion-based voice generation module is involved as the phona-
tory module which aims to imitate the voice identity conditioning
on the voice code 𝑒. After that, we select the AMs predictable from
voice for hypothesis testing. The null hypothesis is made for each
AM and states the AM is unpredictable from voice. We can success-
fully reject the corresponding null hypothesis if any AM estimation
is better than chance on a held-out validation set with statistical
significance. The final 3D facial shapes can be reconstructed by a
fitting process [5] based on the predictable AMs. This is conducted
by adjusting a set of coefficients in low-dimensional space, such
that the differences between the AMs of the generated 3D facial
shape and the predicted AMs are minimized. Intuitively, if there are
more predictable AMs spanning different locations of a face, the
reconstruction can be more indistinguishable.
3.3 Facial AM Prediction
In this section, we illustrate our method to predict facial AMs from
voice.
AM summarization. There is a large body of literature on anthro-
pometry. Extensive studies show that many AMs of human faces
can be associated with voice production [ 10,11,32,38,55]. We
summarize the most commonly used AMs as shown in Fig. 3 (the
complete list of AMs is available in the appendix). The chosen
AMs are categorized as proportion, angles and distance of a set of
face landmarks. Those intra-face features are more robust than 3D
coordinate representations as the variations resulting from spatial
misalignment are completely eliminated.
Uncertainty-aware AM estimation. The AM prediction is con-
ducted by an estimator trained with an uncertainty-aware scheme.
Let𝐹𝑘(𝑣;E𝑘,𝜔𝑘):𝑣↦→Rbe an estimator that maps voice recording
𝑣into the𝑘-th predicted AMs, where E𝑘and𝜔𝑘are the learnable
parameters. As this is a regression problem, we leverage
{E∗
𝑘,𝜔∗
𝑘}=arg min
E𝑘,𝜔𝑘1
|D𝑡|∑︁
(𝑣,𝑚(𝑘))∈D 𝑡(𝐹𝑘(𝑣;E𝑘,𝜔𝑘)−𝑚(𝑘))2(1)
as the training objective for the 𝑘-th AM.|D𝑡|is the number of
the triplets (voice, face and AMs) in dataset D𝑡. By incorporating
uncertainty into the estimator learning, the prediction becomes a
random variable rather than a single value. We leverage a Gaussian
distribution to the prediction. The estimator 𝐹𝑘(𝑣;E𝑘,𝜔𝑘)maps𝑣
Conference’23, July 2023, Ottawa, Canada Xiang Li1, Y andong Wen2, Muqiao Y ang1, Jinglu Wang3, Rita Singh1, Bhiksha Raj1,4
𝑥!𝑥~𝒩(0,	1)*𝑥"#$*𝑥!AM SelectionAM-guidedOptimization
Speech𝑣%𝑧!𝑥$⋯𝑧"𝒜𝒜×(T−1)UNet𝜖!
Speech*𝑣DiffusionProcessDenoisingProcess
Log-melSpec.
Speech 𝑣ℰ[0.1 ⋯0.7]UncertaintyPhonatory Module
Facial AM PredictionAM-guided ReconstructionShare IdentityUnpredictable AMPredictable AMV oice Code 𝑒AMs 
AMs 
Face GeometryBases𝑏$𝑏6𝑏7⋯⋯
𝒫𝒫#$𝒜Attention𝒫Pre-Processing𝜔𝜙
Figure 2: Illustration of our analysis pipeline for voice-face correlation. We randomly pick two voice recordings with shared speaker
identity as𝑣and𝑣′. We then analyze the relationship between each AM and voice by predicting each AM from voice with an estimator
and an intermediate voice code 𝑒. The optional phonatory module equips a diffusion-based voice generation model with a voice code 𝑒
as a condition to conduct voice style cloning to help us understand the relationship between face geometry and voice characteristics,
which serves as an additional constraint to enforce the estimator learn voice identity. We analyze and select AMs with hypothesis
testing. The statically significantly predictable AMs are utilized for 3D facial shape reconstruction for further analysis.
(b) Proportion(c) Angle(d) Distance
(a) Landmarks
Figure 3: Examples of summarized AMs. We summarized three
types of AM: proportion, angle and distance. Those AMs are
computed from the predefined landmark on the 3D face repre-
sentation.
into the mean of the 𝑖-th predicted AM. Similarly, we define an
uncertainty estimator 𝐺𝐿(𝑣;E𝑘,𝜙𝑘):𝑣↦→R+∪{0}that𝑣into the
variance of the 𝑘-th predicted AM. Again, E𝑘and𝜙𝑘are the learn-
able parameters. The predicted AM and its ground truth become
N(𝐹𝑘(𝑣),𝐺𝑘(𝑣))andN(𝑚(0),0)respectively [ 20]. Given two ran-
dom variables, a more reasonable learning objective is to minimize
their KL divergence.
{E∗
𝑘,𝜔∗
𝑘,𝜙∗
𝑘}=arg min
E𝑘,𝜔𝑘,𝜙𝑘1
|D𝑡|∑︁
(𝑣,𝑚(𝑘))∈D 𝑡(𝐹𝑘(𝑣;E𝑘,𝜔𝑘)−𝑚(𝑘))2
𝐺𝑘(𝑣;E𝑘,𝜙𝑘)
+ln𝐺𝑘(𝑣;E𝑘,𝜙𝑘)
(2)
For a fixed(𝐹𝑘(𝑣;E𝑘,𝜔𝑘)−𝑚(𝑘))2, there is an optimal variance
𝐺𝑘(𝑣;E𝑘,𝜙𝑘)=(𝐹𝑘(𝑣;E𝑘,𝜔𝑘)−𝑚(𝑘))2such that the loss function
is minimized. Thereby the uncertainty estimator 𝐺𝑘is learned to
produce a small variance if the prediction error is small and vice
versa. On the contrary, a smaller variance indicates that the predicted
AM is more likely to yield a small prediction error,i.e., close to
the ground truth. In this way, we can choose to trust the predictedAMs when the predicted variances are small, and defer the voice
recordings to human experts otherwise. An extreme case is 𝐺𝑘(𝑣)≡
1where the uncertainty learning objective degrades to the regular
regression model.
Temporal aggregation. In practice, following the convention of
voice understanding, the long voice recording 𝑣is fed into the net-
work in the form of multiple short segments {𝑣(1),···,𝑣(𝐿)}. We
obtain a sequence of means and variances of the predicted AM.
During training, we compute the loss for each segment individually
and average them as the training loss. While during evaluation, the
predicted AM and its uncertainty are given by aggregating the pre-
dictions among all segments. Assuming the short segments from a
long recording are class-conditionally independent, the formulations
of aggregation are
ˆ𝑚(𝑘)=𝐿∑︁
𝑙=1𝑤(𝑘)
𝐺𝑘(𝑣(𝑙))·𝐹𝑘(𝑣(𝑙)),
1
𝑤(𝑘)=𝐿∑︁
𝑙=11
𝐺𝑘(𝑣(𝑙))(3)
where ˆ𝑚(𝑘)is the aggregated mean and also the predicted 𝑘-th AM.
However, the aggregated variance 𝑤(𝑘)is not used as the uncer-
tainty of the predicted 𝑘-th AM since the conditional independence
assumption does not always hold in cases such as noises, silences,
the computed aggregated variance will be biased by the number of
voice segments in the long recording. So we calibrate the uncertainty
asˆ𝑤(𝑘)=𝐿·𝑤(𝑘).
Predictable AM identification. We have collected a number of
AMs and trained estimators for predicting them. However, only a
few of the AMs are actually predictable from voice, which we had
anticipated while designing the task. To identify those AMs, we
Rethinking Voice-Face Correlation: A Geometry View Conference’23, July 2023, Ottawa, Canada
use hypothesis testing to them. Formally, we can write the null and
alternative hypotheses for the 𝑘-th AM as
𝐻0:the AM𝑚(𝑘)is NOT predictable from voice
𝐻1:the AM𝑚(𝑘)is predictable from voice
In order to reject 𝐻0, we only need to find a counterexample to show
that voice is indeed useful in predicting AM 𝑚(𝑘). An effective
example is to compare the estimators with and without the voice
input. If there exists a learned estimator 𝐹𝑘(𝑣)performing better
than the chance-level estimator 𝐶𝑘without using voice input and
the results are statistically significant, we can successfully reject 𝐻0
and accept𝐻1. Here the chance-level estimator for the 𝑘-th AM is
a constant𝐶𝑘=1
|D𝑡|Í
𝑚(𝑘)∈D𝑡𝑚(𝑘), which is the mean 𝑚(𝑘)of
the training setD𝑡. So the null and alternative hypothesis can be
rewritten as
𝐻0:𝜇(𝜖𝑘/𝜖𝐶
𝑘)≤1
𝐻1:𝜇(𝜖𝑘/𝜖𝐶
𝑘)≥1
where𝜖𝑘and𝜖𝐶
𝑘are the mean square errors of estimators with and
without voice inputs on validation set D𝑣2, respectively. The formula-
tions of𝜖𝑘and𝜖𝐶
𝑘are given as𝜖𝑘=1
|D𝑣2|Í
𝑚(𝑘)∈D𝑣2(ˆ𝑚(𝑘)−𝑚(𝑘))2
and𝜖𝐶
𝑘=1
|D𝑣2|Í
𝑚(𝑘)∈D𝑣2(𝐶𝑘−𝑚(𝑘))2. Since the true variance
of𝜖𝑘/𝜖𝐶
𝑘is unknown, the type of hypothesis testing is one-sided
paired-sample t-test. The upper bound of the confidence interval (CI)
is given by
𝐶𝐼𝑢=𝜇(𝜖𝑘/𝜖𝐶
𝑘)+𝑡1−𝛼,𝜈·𝜎(𝜖𝑘/𝜖𝐶
𝑘)
√
𝑁(4)
where𝜇(·)and𝜎(·)are the functions for computing mean and stan-
dard deviation respectively. 𝑁is the number of the repeated experi-
ments and we set 𝑁=100here.𝛼and𝜈=𝑁−1are the significance
level and the degree of freedom respectively. For the purpose of
this section, we adopt the significance level of 5% and then we
can read𝑡0.95,𝑁−1from t-distribution table. Now we can determine
whether to reject 𝐻0and accept𝐻1,i.e., the AM 𝑚(𝑘)is predictable
from voice. According to the experimental results, the probability
that the aforementioned decision is correct is higher than 95%,i.e.,
statistically significant. In contrast, 𝐶𝐼𝑢≥1implies that we fail to
reject𝐻0, for the current experimental results are not statistically
significant enough. Note that failing to reject 𝐻0does not imply we
accept𝐻0.
We emphasize that it is necessary to compute 𝜖𝐶
𝑘and𝜖𝑘onD𝑣2
rather thanD𝑡orD𝑣1. This is because our estimators are trained on
D𝑡and selected by the errors on D𝑣1, we can easily get significantly
lower𝜖𝑘and𝜖𝐶
𝑘on these splits.
Optional phonatory module. Inspired by linear predictive coding
(LPC) [ 25] which leverages voice producing to learn vocal tract
geometry, we aim to facilitate face geometry capture by learning
characteristics of voice. We enroll a phonatory module serving as
an additional constraint when predicting facial AMs. In particu-
lar, we leverage a diffusion-based [ 18] voice generation method
to model the time-domain speech signals. As shown in Fig. 2, the
diffusion model converts the noise distribution to a speech ˜𝑣con-
trolled by the voice code 𝑒extracted from speech 𝑣. During training
speech𝑣′which shares speaker identity with 𝑣is fed to the diffu-
sion model as ground-truth. Please note that the phonatory moduleonly serves as an additional training constraint and is not applied
during inference. Let 𝑥0,···,𝑥𝑇be a sequence of variables with
the same dimension where 𝑡is the index for diffusion time steps.
Then the diffusion process transforms 𝑥0into a Gaussian noise 𝑥𝑇
through a chain of Markov transitions with a set of variance schedule
𝛽1,···,𝛽𝑇. Specifically, each transformation is performed accord-
ing to the Markov transition probability 𝑞(𝑥𝑡|𝑥𝑡−1,𝑒)assumed to be
independent of the style code 𝑒as
𝑞(𝑥𝑡|𝑥𝑡−1,𝑒)=N(𝑥𝑡;√︁
1−𝛽𝑡𝑥𝑡−1,𝛽𝑡𝐼). (5)
Unlike the diffusion process, the denoising process aims to recover
the speech signal from Gaussian noise which is defined as a condi-
tional distribution 𝑝𝜃(𝑥0:𝑇−1|𝑥𝑇,𝑐). Through the reverse transitions
𝑝𝜃(𝑥0:𝑇−1|𝑥𝑇,𝑐), the variables are gradually restored to a speech sig-
nal with style code condition. The phonatory module actually models
a distribution 𝑞(𝑥0|𝑐). By applying the parameterization trick [ 21],
we obtain the additional training constraint as
{E∗,𝜃∗}=arg min
E,𝜃=E𝑥0,𝜖,𝑡∥𝜖−𝜖𝜃(√¯𝛼𝑡𝑥0+√1−¯𝛼𝑡𝜖,𝑡,𝑒)∥1(6)
where𝛼𝑡=1−𝛽𝑡and ¯𝛼𝑡=Î𝑡
𝑡′=1𝛼𝑡′. As shown in Fig. 2, the 𝜃is
a Net [ 36] with cross-attention [ 35]. Since the phonatory model is
only utilized as an auxiliary constraint during training, we omit the
inference details to obtain ˜𝑣here.
3.4 AM-Guided 3D Facial Shape Reconstruction
To reconstruct the 3D facial shape, we first need to predict AMs of
the voice recordings in D𝑒first. Subsequently, we generate the 3D
facial shapes based on the predicted AMs by an optimization-based
method. To do so, we first project the 3D facial shapes into a low-
dimensional linear space [ 5]. By adjusting the coefficients in low-
dimensional space, we obtain different re-projected 3D facial shapes.
The learning objective is to find a set of coefficients, such that the
differences between the AMs of the re-projected 3D facial shape and
the predicted AMs are minimized. Specifically, we construct a big
matrix𝐵=[𝑏1,𝑏2,···]∈ R3𝑇×|D 𝑡|where each column 𝑏𝑖∈R3𝑇×1
is a long vector obtained by flattening a 3D facial shape 𝑓𝑖∈R𝑇×3.
𝑇is the number of vertices on 3D faces. Since 3𝑇≫ |D𝑡|, we
compute the project matrix 𝑃∈R3𝑇×𝑑(𝑑≫3𝑇)using eigenfaces
[5] on𝐵. Now any flattened 3D facial shape 𝑏can be approximated
by re-projecting a low-dimensional vector 𝛽∈R𝑏×1in the form of
𝑃𝛽. We define the computation of AM as 𝑄𝑘(𝑏):𝑏↦→R, which
maps any flattened 3D facial shape 𝑏into the𝑘-th AM of𝑏. Since
𝑄𝑘(·)computes a distance, a proportion, or an angle of the 3D facial
shape, it is a differentiable function. The optimization objective is
given below.
𝛽∗=arg min
𝛽𝜆∥𝛽∥2
2+𝐾∑︁
𝑘=1(𝑄𝑘(𝑃𝛽)−ˆ𝑚(𝑘))2·𝑧(𝑘)(7)
where𝜆is the loss weight balancing two terms. The reconstructed
3D facial shape is given by ˆ𝑏=𝑃𝛽∗.
4 EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we elaborate on the dataset setting, implementation
details and experimental results.
Conference’23, July 2023, Ottawa, Canada Xiang Li1, Y andong Wen2, Muqiao Y ang1, Jinglu Wang3, Rita Singh1, Bhiksha Raj1,4
(a) Male subset(b) Female subset(c) Balanced Female subset
Figure 4: The normalized errors and 𝐶𝐼s of 24 AMs on (a) male subset, (b) female subset, and (c) a smaller female subset. If 1−𝐶𝐼𝑢>0,
the AM is predictable else unpredictable.
4.1 Dataset
We perform experiments on a private audiovisual dataset D. The
dataset consists of paired voice recordings and scanned 3D facial
shapes from 1,026 people, with 364 males and 662 females. The
scanned 3D face is stored in the mesh format with 6790 points for
each face. The voice recordings are about 2 minutes long for each
speaker. We reduce the influencing factors to the voice and face
by (1) asking participants to speak a set of specified sentences, (2)
asking participants to speak without emotion, (3) control the age of
participants (roughly 18-28 years old). In addition, to prevent the
models from taking the gender shortcuts, we split the dataset Dby
gender, and experiments are individually performed on male and fe-
male subsets. For each subset, we adopt 7/1/1/1 splitting for D𝑡/D𝑣1
/D𝑣2/D𝑒. In training, the voice recordings are randomly trimmed
to segments of 6 to 8 seconds, while we use the entire recordings
in testing. The ground truth AMs are normalized to zero mean and
unit variance. For voice features, we extract 64-dimensional log Mel-
spectrograms using an analysis window of 25ms, with the hop of
10ms between frames. We perform mean and variance normalization
of each Mel-frequency bin.4.2 Implementation Details
We leverage a backbone Eto learn voice code 𝑒which is a sim-
ple convolutional neural network. The detailed network structure
is presented in the supplementary materials. 𝐹𝑘and𝐺𝑘share the
backbone’s learnable parameters but have individual parameters for
their heads. We use a single layer fully-connected network for each
head. For the variance head, we add an exponential activation to
the last layer of 𝐺𝑘for non-negative positive output. We follow the
typical settings of stochastic gradient descent (SGD) for optimiza-
tion. Minibatch size is 64. The momentum, learning rate, and weight
decay values are 0.9, 0.1, and 0.0005, respectively. The training is
completed at 5k iterations. Since the phonatory module requires a
long training procedure, we first train it with the voice code encoder
Efor 60k steps on our training set D𝑡. We follow the training setting
in [18] to train the phonatory module. The other parameter setting
follows [ 18]. We directly normalized the voice signal as input to the
network instead of first converting it to Log-Mel spectrum. To ensure
statistical significance, we perform N = 100 repeated experiments to
compute the 𝐶𝐼𝑢. For the experiments at phoneme level, we leverage
Wav2Vec [2] to cut the long voice recordings into phonemes.
Rethinking Voice-Face Correlation: A Geometry View Conference’23, July 2023, Ottawa, Canada
Phonation Module 100% ˆ𝑤 75% ˆ𝑤 50% ˆ𝑤
! 0.953±0.009 0.909±0.024 0.842±0.030
% 0.952±0.014 0.927±0.030 0.879±0.041
Table 1: Effect of the phonatory module. We measure the normal-
ized mean squared error between predicted and ground-truth
AM among all AMs with different confidence thresholds.
MaleFemale
Figure 5: Visualization of the predictable AMs. Blue box: male,
Red box: female.
4.3 Predictable AM Analysis
For AM prediction, the estimation models are trained on D𝑡and
selected based on their performance on D𝑣1(hyperparameter tun-
ing). For AM selection, the predictable AMs are selected based on
the upper bound of the CI (𝐶𝐼𝑢)onD𝑣2. The performance can be
evaluated by the mean error of each AM and its CI.
Fig. 4 shows the results, including 20 AMs with highest 1−𝐶𝐼𝑢
and 4 AMs with lowest 1−𝐶𝐼𝑢. The gray bars are the results on
the entire validation set D𝑣2, while the red and yellow ones are the
results of 75% and 50% voice samples with lowest uncertainty ˆ𝑤on
D𝑣2, respectively. The self-constructed female subset has the same
size as the male subset. Higher 1−𝐶𝐼𝑢indicates better results and
the normalized error of 0 indicates the chance-level performance.
As suggested by our hypothesis testing formulation, the AMs with
1−𝐶𝐼𝑢>0are considered predictable from voice. In this sense,
we have discovered a number of predictable female AMs (see the
gray bars and their 𝐶𝐼𝑢in Fig. 4 (b)). By filtering out the voice
samples with high uncertainties, we achieve even higher 1−𝐶𝐼𝑢(see
the red and yellow bars and their 𝐶𝐼s). The improved performance
indicates that more AMs are discovered as predictable from voice.
The complete results of all AMs are given in the appendix. The
results empirically demonstrate that the information of 3D facial
shape is indeed encoded in the voices and can be discovered by our
analysis pipeline.
To intuitively locate the predictable AMs on the 3D face, we
visualize them in Fig. 5. We clearly observe that most of the pre-
dictable AMs are around nose and mouth, and many of them are
shared between male and female subsets. This is consistent with the
fact that nose and mouth shapes affect pronunciation.
We also notice that the performance of female subset is much
better than that of the male subset. To investigate whether the im-
provements come from the larger data scale (364 males 𝑣.𝑠.662
females), we perform another set of repeated experiments on a self-
constructed female subset, which has the same size as the malePhonatory Module Predictable Unpredictable
! 0.628±0.021 0.990±0.032
% 0.730±0.048 1.002±0.031
Table 2: Effect of phonatory module for predictable and unpre-
dictable AMs. We measure the normalized mean squared error
between predicted and ground-truth AM among all predictable
and unpredictable AMs. Interestingly, we find phonatory mod-
ule only improves predictable AMs.
subset,i.e., 364 females. Surprisingly, the results on the new subset
are still better than those on the male subset, as shown in Fig. 4 (c).
This is possible because the female subjects have higher nasalance
scores on the nasal sentences [ 42] among other things, which pro-
vides useful information for predicting the AMs around the nose.
Here we note that our experiments have revealed that measurements
around the nose are highly correlated to voice. More investigations
are left for future work.
On the other hand, some AMs have not been shown to be pre-
dictable from voice. This observation suggests that voices may only
associate with a few specific regions of the 3D facial shape, like the
nose and mouth. For the AMs with higher errors than chance level,
we do not claim they are not predictable from voice. Instead, we fail
to demonstrate their predictability based on our current empirical
results. The possible reasons include imperfect modeling, limited
data, data noise, etc.
4.4 Effect of Phonatory Module
As presented in Table 1, it is evident that utilizing the phonatory
module during training enhances the accuracy of predicted AMs.
Our evaluation involved computing the normalized error across all
AMs with various confidence thresholds. Although the models with
and without the phonatory module exhibited a marginal difference in
error when evaluating all the data, the ones trained with the phona-
tory module showed a clear improvement in error when considering
more confident samples.
Furthermore, we conducted an error evaluation for predictable
and unpredictable AMs as depicted in Table 2. We observed that
utilizing the phonatory module resulted in a 0.102-point decrease in
normalized error for predictable AMs, highlighting its effectiveness
in improving the prediction performance. Interestingly, the phona-
tory module did not have any apparent effect on unpredictable AMs.
Overall, the results indicate that utilizing the phonatory module
during training is beneficial for predicting AMs, particularly for
predictable ones.
4.5 Phoneme-level Analysis
We also experiment with the voice-face correlation at the phoneme
level. For this experiment, we train and evaluate estimators by taking
one phoneme as input each time. We computed the average 1−𝐶𝐼𝑢
value for each phoneme across all AMs, as shown in Fig. 7. Our
results indicate that /i:/had the highest average 1−𝐶𝐼𝑢value of
0.199, while /b/had the lowest value of -0.06. When the 1−𝐶𝐼𝑢
value is less than 0, it suggests that AMs are generally unpredictable
from the corresponding phoneme.
Conference’23, July 2023, Ottawa, Canada Xiang Li1, Y andong Wen2, Muqiao Y ang1, Jinglu Wang3, Rita Singh1, Bhiksha Raj1,4
100 %90 %80 %70 %60 %50 %MaleFemale
Figure 6: Error maps of the reconstructed 3D facial shapes for the male and female subsets. From left to right: the error maps
corresponding to 100% (i.e. the entire test set) to 50% of the test set.
Phonemes1−𝐶𝐼!
Figure 7: Phonemes with corresponding averaged 𝐶𝐼𝑢in decreas-
ing order.
We observed that the three phonemes with the lowest and negative
1−𝐶𝐼𝑢values were /t/,/b/, and /d/, all of which are plosive
consonants. During the pronunciation of plosive consonants, there
is a complete stoppage of airflow followed by a sudden release of
air through minimal mouth opening and closing. As a result, there
is minimal movement of the facial muscles and structures, making
it challenging for the model to predict AMs based solely on these
phonemes.
In contrast, most vowels achieved good performance in the test set,
with all of the top 6 phonemes belonging to vowels with 1−𝐶𝐼𝑢>
0.10. Compared to consonants, the production of vowels does not
involve constriction of airflow in the vocal tract. Instead, the facial
muscles have relatively greater movement during the pronunciation
of these phonemes, such as jaw movement due to mouth opening or
lip spreading. Thus, vowel phonemes may carry more informationabout facial features, making it easier for the model to capture the
hidden correlation when predicting AMs.
4.6 3D Facial Shape Reconstruction
In Section 4.3, we have discovered a number of predictable AMs,
from which we choose 10 AMs with the highest 1−𝐶𝐼𝑢for the
subsequent reconstructions on male and female subsets.
To evaluate the performance, we compute the per-vertex errors
between the reconstructed 3D facial shape and their ground truths.
We also filter out a portion of voice samples with the highest uncer-
tainties and evaluate the errors in the remaining data. The filter-out
rate is from 0% to 50%, as shown from left to right in Fig. 6.
Unsurprisingly, we achieve the lowest errors around the nose
region for male and female subsets, consistent with the AM estima-
tions. Moreover, the reconstruction errors decrease significantly by
filtering out the voice samples with the highest uncertainties. This
indicates that the learned uncertainty is effectively associated with
the reconstruction quality and allows the system to decide whether
to trust the model or not.
5 CONCLUSION
In conclusion, this paper presents a novel approach to exploring the
voice-face correlation by focusing on the geometric aspects of the
face rather than relying on semantic cues such as gender, age, and
emotion. The proposed voice-anthropometric measurement (AM)-
face paradigm identifies predictable facial AMs from the voice to
guide 3D face reconstruction, which results in significant correla-
tions between voice and specific parts of the face geometry, such as
the nasal cavity and cranium. This approach not only eliminates the
influence of unpredictable AMs but also offers a new perspective
on voice-face correlation, which can be valuable for anthropometry
science. The results of this study open up possibilities for future
research in this area, such as developing more accurate voice-guided
face synthesis techniques and a better understanding of the relation-
ship between voice and facial geometry.
Rethinking Voice-Face Correlation: A Geometry View Conference’23, July 2023, Ottawa, Canada
REFERENCES
[1]Zulfiqar Ali, Ghulam Muhammad, and Mohammed F Alhamid. 2017. An auto-
matic health monitoring system for patients suffering from voice complications in
smart cities. IEEE Access 5 (2017), 3900–3908.
[2]Alexei Baevski, Yuhao Zhou, Abdelrahman Mohamed, and Michael Auli. 2020.
wav2vec 2.0: A framework for self-supervised learning of speech representations.
Advances in neural information processing systems 33 (2020), 12449–12460.
[3]Mohamad Hasan Bahari, Mitchell McLaren, Hugo Van hamme, and David A.
van Leeuwen. 2012. Age Estimation from Telephone Speech using i-vectors. In
Interspeech .
[4]V olker Blanz and Thomas Vetter. 1999. A morphable model for the synthesis of
3D faces. In Proceedings of the 26th annual conference on Computer graphics
and interactive techniques . 187–194.
[5]V olker Blanz and Thomas Vetter. 2003. Face recognition based on fitting a 3D
morphable model. IEEE Transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence
25, 9 (2003), 1063–1074.
[6]Ray Bull, Harriet Rathborn, and Brian R Clifford. 1983. The voice-recognition
accuracy of blind listeners. Perception 12, 2 (1983), 223–226.
[7]R. H. C. Bull, Harriet Rathborn, and Brian R. Clifford. 1983. The V oice-
Recognition Accuracy of Blind Listeners. Perception 12 (1983), 223 – 226.
[8] Lele Chen, Zhiheng Li, Ross K Maddox, Zhiyao Duan, and Chenliang Xu. 2018.
Lip movements generation at a glance. In ECCV . 520–535.
[9]Daniel Cudeiro, Timo Bolkart, Cassidy Laidlaw, Anurag Ranjan, and Michael J
Black. 2019. Capture, learning, and synthesis of 3D speaking styles. In CVPR .
10101–10111.
[10] Leslie G Farkas, Otto G Eiben, Stefan Sivkov, Bryan Tompson, Marko J Katic,
and Christopher R Forrest. 2004. Anthropometric measurements of the facial
framework in adulthood: age-related changes in eight age categories in 600 healthy
white North Americans of European ancestry from 16 to 90 years of age. Journal
of Craniofacial Surgery 15, 2 (2004), 288–298.
[11] Donya Ghafourzadeh, Cyrus Rahgoshay, Sahel Fallahdoust, Adeline Aubame,
Andre Beauchamp, Tiberiu Popa, and Eric Paquette. 2019. Part-based 3D face
morphable model with anthropometric local control. (2019).
[12] Prasanta Kumar Ghosh and Shrikanth Narayanan. 2011. Automatic speech recog-
nition using articulatory features from subject-independent acoustic-to-articulatory
inversion. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 130, 4 (2011), EL251–
EL257.
[13] Patrick Gomez and Brigitta Danuser. 2007. Relationships between musical struc-
ture and psychophysiological measures of emotion. Emotion 7, 2 (2007), 377.
[14] Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley,
Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. 2020. Generative adversarial
networks. Commun. ACM 63, 11 (2020), 139–144.
[15] Joanna Grzybowska and Stanislaw Kacprzak. 2016. Speaker Age Classification
and Regression Using i-Vectors.. In INTERSPEECH . 1402–1406.
[16] Yudong Guo, Keyu Chen, Sen Liang, Yongjin Liu, Hujun Bao, and Juyong Zhang.
2021. AD-NeRF: Audio Driven Neural Radiance Fields for Talking Head Synthe-
sis. In ICCV .
[17] Jing Han, Chloë Brown, Jagmohan Chauhan, Andreas Grammenos, Apinan
Hasthanasombat, Dimitris Spathis, Tong Xia, Pietro Cicuta, and Cecilia Mas-
colo. 2021. Exploring Automatic COVID-19 Diagnosis via voice and symptoms
from Crowdsourced Data. In ICASSP . IEEE.
[18] Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. 2020. Denoising diffusion probabilistic
models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33 (2020), 6840–
6851.
[19] Amir Jamaludin, Joon Son Chung, and Andrew Zisserman. 2019. You said that?:
Synthesising talking faces from audio. International Journal of Computer Vision
(IJCV) 127, 11 (2019), 1767–1779.
[20] Alex Kendall and Yarin Gal. 2017. What uncertainties do we need in bayesian
deep learning for computer vision? Advances in neural information processing
systems 30 (2017).
[21] Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. 2013. Auto-encoding variational bayes.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6114 (2013).
[22] Sheng Li, Dabre Raj, Xugang Lu, Peng Shen, Tatsuya Kawahara, and Hisashi
Kawai. 2019. Improving Transformer-Based Speech Recognition Systems with
Compressed Structure and Speech Attributes Augmentation.. In INTERSPEECH .
4400–4404.
[23] Sheng Li, Dabre Raj, Xugang Lu, Peng Shen, Tatsuya Kawahara, and Hisashi
Kawai. 2019. Improving Transformer-Based Speech Recognition Systems with
Compressed Structure and Speech Attributes Augmentation. In Interspeech .
[24] Corrina Maguinness, Claudia Roswandowitz, and Katharina von Kriegstein. 2018.
Understanding the mechanisms of familiar voice-identity recognition in the human
brain. Neuropsychologia 116 (2018), 179–193.
[25] John D Markel, Augustine H Gray, and Augustine H Gray. 1976. Linear prediction
of speech: Communication and cybernetics. (1976).
[26] Mehdi Mirza and Simon Osindero. 2014. Conditional generative adversarial nets.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1411.1784 (2014).[27] Shah Nawaz, Muhammad Saad Saeed, Pietro Morerio, Arif Mahmood, Ignazio
Gallo, Muhammad Haroon Yousaf, and Alessio Del Bue. 2021. Cross-Modal
Speaker Verification and Recognition: A Multilingual Perspective. In CVPRW .
[28] Hailong Ning, Xiangtao Zheng, Xiaoqiang Lu, and Yuan Yuan. 2021. Disentangled
Representation Learning for Cross-modal Biometric Matching. TMM (2021).
[29] Tae-Hyun Oh, Tali Dekel, Changil Kim, Inbar Mosseri, William T Freeman,
Michael Rubinstein, and Wojciech Matusik. 2019. Speech2face: Learning the face
behind a voice. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition . 7539–7548.
[30] Paul H Ptacek and Eric K Sander. 1966. Age recognition from voice. Journal of
speech and hearing Research 9, 2 (1966), 273–277.
[31] Paul H. Ptacek and Eric K. Sander. 1966. Age recognition from voice. Journal of
speech and hearing research 9 2 (1966), 273–7.
[32] Narayanan Ramanathan and Rama Chellappa. 2006. Modeling age progression
in young faces. In 2006 IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition (CVPR’06) , V ol. 1. IEEE, 387–394.
[33] Mirco Ravanelli and Yoshua Bengio. 2018. Speaker recognition from raw wave-
form with sincnet. In 2018 IEEE Spoken Language Technology Workshop (SLT) .
IEEE, 1021–1028.
[34] Mirco Ravanelli and Yoshua Bengio. 2018. Speaker Recognition from Raw
Waveform with SincNet. 2018 IEEE Spoken Language Technology Workshop
(SLT) (2018), 1021–1028.
[35] Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn
Ommer. 2022. High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models.
InProceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition . 10684–10695.
[36] Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. 2015. U-net: Convolutional
networks for biomedical image segmentation. In Medical Image Computing and
Computer-Assisted Intervention–MICCAI 2015: 18th International Conference,
Munich, Germany, October 5-9, 2015, Proceedings, Part III 18 . Springer, 234–
241.
[37] Leda Sarı, Kritika Singh, Jiatong Zhou, Lorenzo Torresani, Nayan Singhal, and
Yatharth Saraf. 2021. A Multi-View Approach to Audio-Visual Speaker Verifica-
tion. In ICASSP .
[38] Zhiyi Shan, Richard Tai-Chiu Hsung, Congyi Zhang, Juanjuan Ji, Wing Shan Choi,
Wenping Wang, Yanqi Yang, Min Gu, and Balvinder S Khambay. 2021. Anthro-
pometric accuracy of three-dimensional average faces compared to conventional
facial measurements. Scientific Reports 11, 1 (2021), 1–12.
[39] Rita Singh, Joseph Keshet, Deniz Gencaga, and Bhiksha Raj. 2016. The relation-
ship of voice onset time and voice offset time to physical age. In ICASSP . IEEE,
5390–5394.
[40] Rita Singh, Bhiksha Raj, and Deniz Gencaga. 2016. Forensic anthropometry from
voice: an articulatory-phonetic approach. In 2016 39th International Convention
on Information and Communication Technology, Electronics and Microelectronics
(MIPRO) . IEEE, 1375–1380.
[41] Ruijie Tao, Rohan Kumar Das, and Haizhou Li. 2020. Audio-visual speaker
recognition with a cross-modal discriminative network. In INTERSPEECH .
[42] Tomáš Vampola, Jaromír Horá ˇcek, V ojt ˇech Radolf, Jan G Švec, and Anne-Maria
Laukkanen. 2020. Influence of nasal cavities on voice quality: Computer simula-
tions and experiments. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 148, 5
(2020), 3218–3231.
[43] Zhong-Qiu Wang and Ivan Tashev. 2017. Learning utterance-level representations
for speech emotion and age/gender recognition using deep neural networks. In
ICASSP . IEEE, 5150–5154.
[44] Peisong Wen, Qianqian Xu, Yangbangyan Jiang, Zhiyong Yang, Yuan He, and
Qingming Huang. 2021. Seeking the Shape of Sound: An Adaptive Framework
for Learning V oice-Face Association. In CVPR . 16347–16356.
[45] Yandong Wen, Bhiksha Raj, and Rita Singh. 2019. Face Reconstruction from
V oice using Generative Adversarial Networks. In NeurIPS , V ol. 32.
[46] Olivia Wiles, A Koepke, and Andrew Zisserman. 2018. X2face: A network
for controlling face generation using images, audio, and pose codes. In ECCV .
670–686.
[47] Cho-Ying Wu, Chin-Cheng Hsu, and Ulrich Neumann. 2022. Cross-Modal Per-
ceptionist: Can Face Geometry be Gleaned from V oices?. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 10452–
10461.
[48] Marzena Wyganowska-Swikatkowska, Iwona Kowalkowska, Grazyna Flicinska-
Pamfil, Mikolaj Dabrowski, Przemyslaw Kopczynski, and Bozena Wiskirska-
Woznica. 2017. V ocal training in an anthropometrical aspect. Logopedics Phoni-
atrics Vocology 42, 4 (2017), 178–186.
[49] Marzena Wyganowska-Swikatkowska, Iwona Kowalkowska, Katarzyna Mehr, and
Mikolaj Dkabrowski. 2013. An anthropometric analysis of the head and face in
vocal students. Folia Phoniatrica et Logopaedica 65, 3 (2013), 136–142.
[50] Muqiao Yang, Joseph Konan, David Bick, Yunyang Zeng, Shuo Han, Anurag
Kumar, Shinji Watanabe, and Bhiksha Raj. 2023. PAAPLoss: A Phonetic-Aligned
Acoustic Parameter Loss for Speech Enhancement. Proc. of ICASSP (2023).
Conference’23, July 2023, Ottawa, Canada Xiang Li1, Y andong Wen2, Muqiao Y ang1, Jinglu Wang3, Rita Singh1, Bhiksha Raj1,4
[51] Zixing Zhang, Bingwen Wu, and Björn Schuller. 2019. Attention-augmented
end-to-end multi-task learning for emotion prediction from speech. In ICASSP .
IEEE, 6705–6709.
[52] Zixing Zhang, Bingwen Wu, and Björn Schuller. 2019. Attention-augmented
End-to-end Multi-task Learning for Emotion Prediction from Speech. ICASSP
2019 - 2019 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing (ICASSP) (2019), 6705–6709.[53] Aihua Zheng, Menglan Hu, Bo Jiang, Yan Huang, Yan Yan, and Bin Luo. 2021.
Adversarial-metric learning for audio-visual cross-modal matching. TMM (2021).
[54] Hang Zhou, Yu Liu, Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, and Xiaogang Wang. 2019. Talking
face generation by adversarially disentangled audio-visual representation. In AAAI ,
V ol. 33. 9299–9306.
[55] Ziqing Zhuang, Douglas Landsittel, Stacey Benson, Raymond Roberge, and
Ronald Shaffer. 2010. Facial anthropometric differences among gender, ethnicity,
and age groups. Annals of occupational hygiene 54, 4 (2010), 391–402.